Add ERC 8049: Contract-Level Onchain Metadata (#1260)
ethereum/ERCs: ERCS/erc-8049.md

---
eip: 8049
title: Contract-Level Onchain Metadata

> description: A standard for storing contract-level metadata onchain with optional Diamond Storage pattern for predictable storage locations.

Author: ok nice!

author: Prem Makeig (@nxt3d)
discussions-to: https://ethereum-magicians.org/t/erc-8049-contract-level-metadata-with-diamond-storage/25819
status: Draft
type: Standards Track
category: ERC
created: 2025-10-10
---

## Abstract

This ERC defines a standard for storing contract-level metadata onchain. It extends [ERC-7572](./eip-7572.md)'s contract-level metadata concept by providing onchain storage. Contracts MAY optionally use [ERC-8042](./eip-8042.md)'s Diamond Storage pattern for predictable storage locations, enabling cross-chain compatibility and supporting upgradable contracts.

## Motivation

> ERC-7572 provides a standard for contract-level metadata via `contractURI()`, but it primarily focuses on offchain metadata storage. This ERC extends that concept by providing onchain storage. Contracts that need predictable storage locations for cross-chain compatibility or upgradable contracts can optionally use the Diamond Storage pattern from ERC-8042.

Reviewer: Your motivation is mostly just restating your abstract. Instead, this section should explain why the ecosystem needs this new standard. What use cases does it enable? Why is this particular proposal better than other (possibly hypothetical) competing proposals?

## Specification

The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in RFC 2119 and RFC 8174.

### Scope

This ERC is an optional extension that MAY be implemented by any smart contract that wishes to store contract-level metadata onchain.

### Required Metadata Function and Event

Contracts implementing this ERC MUST implement the following interface:

```solidity
interface IERCXXXX {
    /// @notice Get contract metadata value for a key.
    function getContractMetadata(string calldata key) external view returns (bytes memory);
    
    /// @notice Emitted when contract metadata is updated.
    event ContractMetadataUpdated(string indexed indexedKey, string key, bytes value);
}
```

- `getContractMetadata(key)`: Returns the contract metadata value for the given key as bytes

> Contracts implementing this ERC MAY also expose a `setContractMetadata(string calldata key, bytes calldata value)` function to allow metadata updates, with write policy determined by the contract.

Reviewer: I'd recommend putting `setContractMetadata` into its own interface. That makes, for example, ERC-165 implementation easier.

Author: There are many ways that metadata can be set. I am unsure about this change.

Contracts implementing this ERC MUST emit the following event when metadata is set:

```solidity
event ContractMetadataUpdated(string indexed indexedKey, string key, bytes value);
```
### Key/Value Pairs

This ERC specifies that the key is a string type and the value is bytes type. This provides flexibility for storing any type of data while maintaining an intuitive string-based key interface.

### Optional Key Parameters

> Keys MAY include parameters to represent variations or instances of a metadata type. When keys include parameters, they SHOULD use TOON format (a minimal agent-optimized format similar to YAML, developed by Johann Schopplich) with a colon and space separator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Keys MAY include parameters to represent variations or instances of a metadata type. When keys include parameters, they SHOULD use Token-Oriented Object Notation (TOON) format.
```

> Keys MAY include parameters to represent variations or instances of a metadata type. When keys include parameters, they SHOULD use TOON format (a minimal agent-optimized format similar to YAML, developed by Johann Schopplich) with a colon and space separator.

Reviewer: Mentioning TOON here is kinda an external reference. Generally we let this slide for JSON and other well-known formats, but I don't believe TOON qualifies as well-known yet.

We have two options here. Either we allow the TOON specification as an external origin (see [EIP-5757](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-5757)), or you just copy the spec (it's available under MIT) into your assets directory and link to it there. How would you like to proceed?

- `"registration: 1"`
- `"registration: 2"`
- `"registration: 3"`

**Not recommended:**
- `"registration-1"` (hyphen separator)
- `"registration:1"` (colon without space)
- `"registration1"` (no separator)

This format provides a clean, consistent way to represent parameterized keys while maintaining readability and compatibility with TOON format parsers.

### Optional Diamond Storage

Contracts implementing this ERC MAY use Diamond Storage pattern for predictable storage locations. If implemented, contracts MUST use the namespace ID `"erc8049.contract.metadata.storage"`.

The Diamond Storage pattern provides predictable storage locations for data, which is useful for cross-chain applications using inclusion proofs and for upgradable contracts. For more details on Diamond Storage, see ERC-8042.

### Value Interpretation

If no standard is specified for a metadata value, clients MAY assume the value is a UTF-8 encoded string (bytes(string)) unless otherwise specified by the implementing contract or protocol.

### Examples

#### Example: Basic Contract Information

A contract can store basic information about itself:

- Key: `"name"` → Value: `bytes("MyToken")`

> - Key: `"description"` → Value: `bytes("A decentralized exchange for trading ERC-20 tokens")`

Reviewer: If this is just an example, it'll be easier to remove the `ERC-20` from the string than to update the linting tool.

That said, this is technically a bug in the tool, so if you'd like to keep this, you may and I'll fix the tool.

## Rationale

This design prioritizes simplicity and flexibility by using a string-key, bytes-value store that provides an intuitive interface for any type of contract metadata. The minimal interface with a single `getContractMetadata` function provides all necessary functionality. The optional `setContractMetadata` function enables flexible access control for metadata updates. The required `ContractMetadataUpdated` event provides transparent audit trails with indexed key for efficient filtering. Contracts that need predictable storage locations can optionally use Diamond Storage pattern. This makes the standard suitable for diverse use cases including contract identification, collaboration tracking, and custom metadata storage.

## Backwards Compatibility

- Fully compatible with existing smart contracts.
- Non-supporting clients can ignore the scheme.

## Reference Implementation

The interface is defined in the Required Metadata Function and Event section above. Here are reference implementations:

### Basic Implementation

```solidity

> // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Author: deleted the SPDX-License-Identifier

pragma solidity ^0.8.25;

import "./IERCXXXX.sol";

contract BasicContractMetadata is IERCXXXX {
    // Simple mapping for contract-level metadata
    mapping(string key => bytes value) private _metadata;

    function getContractMetadata(string calldata key) external view override returns (bytes memory) {
        return _metadata[key];
    }

    function setContractMetadata(string calldata key, bytes calldata value) external {
        _metadata[key] = value;
        emit ContractMetadataUpdated(key, key, value);
    }
}
```

### Diamond Storage Implementation

```solidity

> // SPDX-License-Identifier: MIT

Reviewer: Same license comment.
